HRTF Measurements of a KEMAR Dummy-Head Microphone
MIT Media Lab Perceptual Computing - Technical Report #280

Bill Gardner and Keith Martin
MIT Media Lab
May, 1994

abstract

An extensive set of head-related transfer function (In this document,
we use the acronym HRTF to refer to head related impulse responses.
The impulse response and transfer function are related in the obvious
way by the Fourier transform.) measurements of a KEMAR dummy head
microphone has recently been completed.  The measurements consist of
the left and right ear impulse responses from a Realistic Optimus Pro
7 loudspeaker mounted 1.4 meters from the KEMAR.  Maximum length (ML)
pseudo-random binary sequences were used to obtain the impulse
responses at a sampling rate of 44.1 kHz.  In total, 710 different
positions were sampled at elevations from -40 degrees to +90 degrees.
Also measured were the impulse response of the speaker in free field
and several headphones placed on the KEMAR. This data is being made
available to the research community on the Internet via anonymous FTP
and the World Wide Web.

Measurement technique

Measurements were made using a Macintosh Quadra computer equipped with
an Audiomedia II DSP card, which has 16-bit stereo A/D and D/A
converters that operate at a 44.1 kHz sampling rate.  One of the audio
output channels was sent to an amplifier which drove a Realistic
Optimus Pro 7 loudspeaker.  This is a small two way loudspeaker with a
4 inch woofer and 1 inch tweeter.  The KEMAR, Knowles Electronics
model DB-4004, was equipped with model DB-061 left pinna, model DB-065
(large red) right pinna, Etymotic ER-11 microphones, and Etymotic
ER-11 preamplifiers.  The outputs of the microphone preamplifiers were
connected to the stereo inputs of the Audiomedia card.

From the standpoint of the Audiomedia card, a signal sent to the audio
outputs results in a corresponding signal appearing at the audio
inputs.  Measuring the impulse response of this system yields the
impulse response of the combined system consisting of the Audiomedia
D/A and A/D converters and anti-alias filters, the amplifier, the
speaker, the room in which the measurements are made, and most
importantly, the response of the KEMAR with its associated microphones
and preamps.  We can avoid interference due to room reflections by
ensuring that any reflections occur well after the head response time,
which is several milliseconds.  We can compensate for a non-uniform
speaker response by measuring the speaker response separately and
creating an inverse filter.  The inverse filter, when applied to an
HRTF measurement, equalizes the speaker response to be flat.

The impulse responses were obtained using ML sequences (for a detailed
description of the ML sequence measurement technique, see [2]).  The
sequence length was N = 16383 samples, corresponding to a 14-bit
generating register.  Two copies of the sequence were concatenated to
form a 2*N sample sound which was played from the Audiomedia card.
Simultaneously, 2*N samples were recorded on both the left and right
input channels (we wrote software for the Audiomedia to simultaneously
play and record stereo sounds).  For each input channel, the following
technique was used to recover the impulse response.  The first N
samples of the result were discarded, and the remaining N samples were
duplicated to form a 2*N sample sequence.  This was cross-correlated
with the original N sample ML sequence using FFT based block
convolution, forming a 3*N - 1 sample result.  The N sample impulse
response was extracted starting at N - 1 samples into this result.

Noise in the ML sequence impulse responses can be attributed to
measurement noise, non-linearities in the system, and time aliasing.
Measurement noise can be averaged out by using longer ML sequences.
This is completely analagous to averaging smaller length measurements.
For instance, averaging two independent N point impulse response
measurements should achieve a 3 dB signal to noise ratio (SNR)
improvement over either of the measurements considered alone.
Similarly, using a 2*N(+1) point ML sequence should achieve a 3 dB SNR
improvement over using an N point ML sequence.  However, noise caused
by non-linearities in the system will not be reduced by repeated
averaging over ML sequence measurements, because the noise is
correlated between measurements.  It is necessary either to use longer
ML sequences or to average the reponses resulting from different ML
sequences (i.e. from different masks) to reduce noise caused by
non-linearities (see [3]).  Time aliasing can be eliminated by using
ML sequences which are longer than the reverberation time of the
measurement space.  Since the measurements were done in an anechoic
chamber and the ML sequences were sufficiently long, time aliasing was
not a problem.  We chose 16383 point measurements to give good signal
to noise ratios without excessive storage requirements or computation
time.  The measured SNR was 65 dB, as discussed later.

Measurement procedure

The measurements were made in MIT's anechoic chamber.  The KEMAR was
mounted upright on a motorized turntable which could be rotated
accurately to any azimuth under computer control.  The speaker was
mounted on a boom stand which enabled accurate positioning of the
speaker to any elevation with respect to the KEMAR.  Thus, the
measurements were made one elevation at a time, by setting the speaker
to the proper elevation and then rotating the KEMAR to each azimuth.
With the KEMAR facing forward toward the speaker (0 degrees azimuth),
the speaker was positioned such that a normal ray projected from the
center of the face of the speaker bisected the interaural axis of the
KEMAR at a distance of 1.4 meters.  This was accomplished using a tape
measure, plumb line, calculator, a 1.4 meter rod, and a fair amount of
eyeballing.  We believe the speaker was always within 0.5 inch of the
desired position, which corresponds to an angular error of +/- 0.5
degrees.

The spherical space around the KEMAR was sampled at elevations from
-40 degrees (40 degrees below the horizontal plane) to +90 degrees
(directly overhead).  At each elevation, a full 360 degrees of azimuth
was sampled in equal sized increments.  The increment sizes were
chosen to maintain approximately 5 degree great-circle increments.
The table below shows the number of samples and azimuth increment at
each elevation (all angles in degrees).  A total of 710 locations were
sampled.


              Elevation    Number of     Azimuth 
                         Measurements   Increment
                -40           56           6.43
                -30           60           6.00
                -20           72           5.00
                -10           72           5.00
                  0           72           5.00
                 10           72           5.00
                 20           72           5.00
                 30           60           6.00
                 40           56           6.43
                 50           45           8.00
                 60           36          10.00
                 70           24          15.00
                 80           12          30.00
                 90            1           x.xx 

           Table 1: Number of measurements and azimuth
                    increment at each elevation

If the KEMAR was perfectly symmetrical and its ear microphones were
identical, we would only need to sample either the left or right
hemisphere around the KEMAR.  However, our KEMAR had two different
pinnae (the left pinna was ``normal'', the right pinna was the ``large
red'' model), and consequently the responses were not identical.  This
was actually a bonus, because by sampling the entire sphere we
obtained two complete sets of symmetrical HRTFs.

Speaker and headphone measurements

The impulse response of the Optimus Pro 7 speaker was measured in the
anechoic chamber using a Neumann KMi 84 microphone at a distance of
1.4 meters.  The measurement technique was exactly the same as the
HRTF measurements.  The speaker impulse response can be used to create
an inverse filter to equalize the HRTF measurements, as will be
discussed later.

In addition to measuring the speaker response, we also measured a
variety of headphones placed on the KEMAR.  The headphones measured
are listed in Table 2.

        AKG K240               Circumaural, closed earcups, but
                                not well isolated.
        Sennheiser HD480       Supraaural, open air. 
        Radio Shack Nova 38    Supraaural, walkman style.
        Sony Twin Turbo	       Intraaural, earplug style.

              Table 2: Description of headphones measured

It is possible the HRTF data will be used to create a spatial auditory
display, in which case the frequency response of the headphones used
to render the display is important.  The above headphone responses may
be useful to create appropriate inverse filters.  We did not gather
data on the repeatablitity of such measurements (i.e. how much
variation in the frequency response is expected each time the
headphones are placed on the head).

The data

As described earlier, each HRTF measurement yielded a 16383 point
impulse response at a 44.1 kHz sampling rate.  Most of this data is
irrelevant.  The 1.4 meter air travel corresponds to approximately 180
samples, and there is an additional delay of 50 samples inherent in
the playback/recording system.  Consequently, in each impulse
response, there is a delay of approximately 230 samples before the
head response occurs.  The head response persists for several hundred
samples (subject to interpretation) and is followed by various
reflections off objects in the anechoic chamber (such as the KEMAR
turntable).  In order to reduce the size of the data set without
eliminating anything of potential interest, we decided to discard the
first 200 samples of each impulse response and save the next 512
samples.  Each HRTF response is thus 512 samples long.  Most
researchers will no doubt truncate this data further.

The impulse responses are stored as 16-bit signed integers, with the
most significant byte stored in the low address (i.e. Motorola 68000
format).  The dynamic range of the 16-bit integers (96 dB) exceeds the
signal to noise ratio of the measurements, which we conservatively
measured to be 65 dB.  Using the 0 degree elevation, 0 degree azimuth,
left ear, 16383 point measurement, we compared the energy in 100
samples centered on the head response to the first 100 samples of the
response (these should ideally be zero) which yielded the 65 dB SNR.

The HRTF data is stored in directories by elevation.  Each directory
name has the format ``elevEE'', where EE is the elevation angle.
Within each directory each filename has the format ``XEEeAAAa.dat''
where X is either ``L'' or ``R'' for left and right ear response,
respectively, EE is the elevation angle of the source in degrees, from
-40 to 90, and AAA is the azimuth of the source in degrees, from 0 to
355.  Elevation and azimuth angles indicate the location of the source
relative to the KEMAR, such that elevation 0 azimuth 0 is directly in
front of the KEMAR, elevation 90 is directly above the KEMAR,
elevation 0 azimuth 90 is directly to the right of the KEMAR, etc.
For example, the file ``R-20e270a.dat'' is the right ear response,
with the source 20 degrees below the horizontal plane and 90 degrees
to the left of the head.  Note that three digits are always given for
azimuth so that the files appear in sorted order in each directory.

To select a pair of HRTF responses, we recommend using symmetrical
responses obtained from one of the KEMAR ears.  For instance, for the
HRTF responses for a source 45 degrees to the right of the head at 0
degrees elevation, use ``L0e045a.dat'' for the left ear and
``L0e315a.dat'' for the right ear, or use ``R0e315a.dat'' for the left
ear and ``R0e045a.dat'' for the right ear.  Note that this approach
eliminates binaural localization cues in the median plane.

The maximum sample value in the left ear HRTF data is -26793 in file
``L40e289a.dat''.  In the right ear HRTF data the maximum value is
29877 in the file ``R40e039a.dat''.

The speaker impulse response and headphone impulse responses are
stored in the directory ``headphones+spkr''.  An inverse filter for
the Optimus Pro 7 speaker is included.  The inverse filter was
designed by zero-padding the measured impulse response and taking the
DFT of the zero-padded sequence.  The resulting complex spectrum was
inverted by negating the phase and inverting the magnitude. This was
done over the range from DC to 18 kHz; beyond 18 kHz the inverse
spectrum was made flat by repeating the 18 kHz magnitude value.  The
inverse filter was obtained by computing the inverse DFT of this
spectrum. A minimum phase version of this inverse filter was also
computed using the real cepstrum (see [1]). The files in the
``headphones+spkr'' directory are listed in Table 3.

            filename              description 
       Optimus.dat           Optimus Pro 7 impulse response 
       Opti_inverse.dat      Inverse filter for Optimus Pro 7 
       Opti_minphase.dat     Minimum phase inverse filter
       AKG-K240-L.dat        AKG headphone impulse response 
       AKG-K240-R.dat 
       Senn-HD480-L.dat      Sennheiser headphone impulse response
       Senn-HD480-R.dat  
       RS-Nova38-L.dat       Radio Shack headphone impulse response
       RS-Nova38-R.dat  
       Sony-TwinTurbo-L.dat  Sony headphone impulse response 
       Sony-TwinTurbo-R.dat  

       Table 3: Contents of ``headphones+spkr'' directory


The 512 point impulse responses and speaker and headphone data may be
found in the tar archive ``full.tar.Z''.

Compact data files

For those interested purely in 3-D audio synthesis, we have included a
data-reduced set of 128 point symmetrical HRTFs derived from the left
ear KEMAR responses.  These have also been equalized to compensate for
the non-uniform response of the Optimus Pro 7 speaker.  The 128 point
responses may be found in the tar archive ``compact.tar.Z''.  The
data-reduced impulse responses are stored in directories by elevation
as described above.  Within each directory each filename has the
format ``HEEeAAAa.dat'' where EE is the elevation angle of the source
in degrees, and AAA is the azimuth angle of the source in degrees.

Each file contains a stereo pair of 128 point impulse responses
corresponding to the left and right ear responses for the given source
position.  For instance, the file ``H0e090a.dat'' contains the left
and right ear impulse responses for a source directly to the right of
the listener. The left response was derived from the 512 point file
``L0e090a.dat'' and the right response was derived from the 512 point
file ``L0e270a.dat''. The data is stored as 16-bit integers and the
stereo samples are stored in (left, right) interleaved order.  Each
128 point response was obtained by convolving the appropriate 512
point impulse responses with the minimum phase inverse filter for the
Optimus Pro 7 speaker.  The resulting impulse responses were then
cropped by retaining 128 samples starting at sample index 26.  The
maximum sample value in the 128 point data is 30496 in the file
``H-10e100a.dat''.

Accessing the data on the Internet

The data is organized into two tar archives, this document (postscript
and plain text) and a text README file.  The structure of the tar
archives is described in the previous sections.

To retrieve the HRTF data by anonymous FTP, your FTP session would
look something like the following:

kdm@eno:~ > ftp sound.media.mit.edu
Connected to sound.media.mit.edu. 
220 sound.media.mit.edu FTP server (ULTRIX Version 4.1 Tue Mar 19 00:38:17 EST 1991) ready. 
Name (sound.media.mit.edu:kdm): anonymous 
331 Guest login ok, send ident as password. 
Password: {Type your User ID here} 
230 Guest login ok, access restrictions apply. 
ftp> cd pub
250 CWD command successful.
ftp> cd Data
250 CWD command successful. 
ftp> cd KEMAR
250 CWD command successful.
ftp> ls
200 PORT command successful. 
150 Opening data connection for /bin/ls (18.85.0.105,3975) (0 bytes). 
README 
compact.tar.Z 
full.tar.Z 
hrtfdoc.ps 
hrtfdoc.txt 
226 Transfer complete. 
60 bytes received in 0.42 seconds (0.14 Kbytes/s) 
ftp> binary
200 Type set to I. 
ftp> get README
200 PORT command successful. 
150 Opening data connection for README (18.85.0.105,3806) (417 bytes). 
226 Transfer complete. 
local: README remote: README 
952 bytes received in 0.043 seconds (22 Kbytes/s) 

etc.

Please note that there are no files shared between the two tar archive
files.  To expand the tar archives, use:

         kdm@eno:~ > uncompress full.tar.Z
         kdm@eno:~ > tar xvf full.tar
         kdm@eno:~ > uncompress compact.tar.Z
         kdm@eno:~ > tar xvf compact.tar

This will create the directories ``full'' and ``compact''.

To retrieve the HRTF data via the WWW, use your browser to open the
following URL:

         http://sound.media.mit.edu/KEMAR.html

Simply follow the directions found in the html document.

Usage restrictions

This HRTF data is Copyright 1994 by the MIT Media Lab.  It is provided
without any usage restrictions.  We request that you cite the authors
when using this data for research or commercial applications.

Correspondence

All correspondence regarding this data should be directed to:

    Keith Martin                    Bill Gardner 
    MIT Media Lab, E15-401D         MIT Media Lab, E15-401B 
    20 Ames Street            or    20 Ames Street
    Cambridge, MA 02139             Cambridge, MA 02139 
    kdm@media.mit.edu               billg@media.mit.edu

Acknowledgements

The successful completion of this project would not have been possible
without the help and support of W. M. Rabinowitz, J. G. Desloge,
Abhijit Kulkarni, and the MIT Media Lab Machine Listening Group.  This
research is supported in part by the MIT Media Laboratory and the
National Science Foundation.


Bibliography

[1] A. V. Oppenheim and R. W. Schafer. Discrete-Time Signal Processing.
       Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1989.

[2] D. D. Rife and J. Vanderkooy. ``Transfer-Function Measurements using
       Maximum-Length Sequences''. J. Audio Eng. Soc., 37(6):419-444,
       June 1989.

[3] J. Vanderkooy. ``Aspects of MLS Measuring Systems''.
       J. Audio Eng. Soc., 42(4):219-231, April 1994.
